MSC4354: Sticky Events (#4354)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4354-sticky-events.md

Reviewer: Implementation requirements:

* [ ] Client (usage)
* [ ] Client (receive/handle)
* [ ] Server

Reviewer 2: The implementations for the client do not *yet* implement the latest versions of this MSC. This is currently in progress.

Reviewer: @Half-Shot which parts are those specifically? A review of the implementations appear to show it setting up things in a mostly-correct way. (I have no context on what transpired on this MSC between proto-MSC and now)

Reviewer 2: The 3-pules have become 4-pules again so I'll need to check that this all still works.

* They aren’t extensible.   
* They do not guarantee delivery. Each EDU type has slightly different persistence/delivery guarantees,
  all of which currently fall short of guaranteeing delivery.

This proposal adds such a primitive, called Sticky Events, which provides the following guarantees:

* Eventual delivery (with timeouts) and convergence.  
* Access control tied to the joined members in the room.  
* Extensible, able to be sent by clients.

This new primitive can be used to implement MatrixRTC participation, live location sharing, among other functionality.

## Proposal

Message events can be annotated with a new top-level `sticky` key, which MUST have a `duration_ms`,
which is the number of milliseconds for the event to be sticky. The presence of `sticky.duration_ms`
with a valid value makes the event “sticky”[^stickyobj]. Valid values are the integer range 0-3600000 (1 hour).

```json
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 600000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": { ... }
}
```

> This key can be set by clients in the CS API by a new query parameter `stick_duration_ms`, which is

Author: You're not the first person to raise this, I think @toger5 did as well. Let's change it.

eagerly synchronise such events anymore, nor send them down `/sync`, nor re-evaluate their soft-failure status.
Note: policy servers and other similar antispam techniques still apply to these events.

The new sync section looks like:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "join": {
      "!726s6s6q:example.com": {
        "account_data": { ... },
        "ephemeral": { ... },
        "state": { ... },
        "timeline": { ... },
        "sticky": {
            "events": [
                {
                    "sender": "@bob:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
                    "content": { ... }
                },
                {
                    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920311020,
                    "content": { ... }
                }
            ]
        }
    }
  }
}
```

> Over Simplified Sliding Sync, Sticky Events have their own extension `sticky_events`, which has the following response shape:

Author: It's like it's stuck in JSON syntax mode :S

> Over Simplified Sliding Sync, Sticky Events have their own extension `sticky_events`, which has the following response shape:

Reviewer 3: I think there's a closing bracket missing: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354/files#r2354698307

To calculate if any sticky event is still sticky:

* Calculate the start time:  
  * The start time is `min(now, origin_server_ts)`. This ensures that malicious origin timestamps cannot
    specify start times in the future.  
  * If the event is pushed via `/send`, servers MAY use the current time as the start time. This minimises
    the risk of clock skew causing the start time to be too far in the past. See “Potential issues \> Time”.  
* Calculate the end time as `start_time + min(stick_duration_ms, 3600000)`.  
* If the end time is in the future, the event remains sticky.

Sticky events are like normal message events and are authorised using normal PDU checks. They have the
following _additional_ properties[^prop]:

* They are eagerly synchronised with all other servers.[^partial]  
* They must appear in the `/sync` response.[^sync]  
* The soft-failure checks MUST be re-evaluated when the membership state changes for a user with unexpired sticky events.[^softfail]
* They ignore history visibility checks. Any joined user is authorised to see sticky events for the duration they remain sticky.

To implement these properties, servers MUST:

> * Attempt to send all sticky events to all joined servers, whilst respecting per-server backoff times.

Reviewer 4: How does this work on the receiving server? Currently, if a server receives an old event it will a) fetch the previous ten events, b) adds it to forward extremities, and c) send the batch down `/sync`. I'm not sure that is really want we want to happen here?

OTOH, if we flag the event as some sort of "outlier" so that the above doesn't happen, then:
1. How do you authenticate the event?
2. If you don't add it to forward extremities then you lose convergence / resilience against equivocation attacks.

Which also doesn't feel great

Author: This is one reason why each server is responsible for sending their own user's sticky events and not other server's users. By doing this it means the server must know about the prev_events in the sticky events it sends, and hence it is able to serve up at least 1 prev event to avoid tripping the "refusing to divulge prev events" problem.

Reviewer 4: Sure, but on the receiving server you'll end up seeing a chunks of disconnected history in a confusing order? 

Concretely, say if you have a bunch of events that need to be sent to a server: ` .. <- E1 <- E2 <- S <- E3 <- ... <- En`, where `S` is an unexpired sticky event. The sending server sends `S` and `En`, and the receiving server then will fetch the previous ten messages for each. If the receiving server processes `En` first, then on clients you would see `E1, E2, S` *last*

Author: Right, the processing order on the receiving server is critical as that affects the client's arrival/stream ordering. Looking at synapse, the processing order is the done based on the received timestamp (arrival ordering on the server) if this SQL is to be believed:
```sql
                SELECT event_json, internal_metadata, origin
                FROM federation_inbound_events_staging
                WHERE room_id = ?
                ORDER BY received_ts ASC
```
..and they are inserted into `federation_inbound_events_staging` according to their position in the transaction https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/blob/v1.138.2/synapse/federation/federation_server.py#L455-L498

This means if we send `[A,B,C]` then they get processed as `[A,B,C]`. We can add a section to explain that sticky events should be positioned in the transaction according to their sent order (stream order), as we do with other events. That means in your scenario we would send `[S, En]` and then process `S` first, producing the correct ordering.

Does this sound reasonable to you?

Reviewer 4: Having thought about this a bit, does this lead to the following situation:

Say you have two servers `S1` and `S2` which share a room, with `S2` down. A call is started between multiple people on `S1`, they chat a bit and then end the call. `S2` then comes back online and receives the sticky events for all the call participants in order, and `S2` process them in order (including backfilling and fetching `/state` etc).  On syncing clients I think this would result in the call sticky events trickling down, and e.g. triggering the client to ring and then stop ringing when the call-end is finished processing? This would also presumably trigger push notifications as well?

Author: I don't think there is anything actionable here re:

> On syncing clients I think this would result in the call sticky events trickling down, and e.g. triggering the client to ring and then stop ringing when the call-end is finished processing? This would also presumably trigger push notifications as well?

Yes, this will happen, but it can also happen today due to servers not having `/send` transaction atomicity. Similarly, `m.call.notify` is used to control ringing/push notifications and it is a distinct event type to RTC members so your concerns, whilst entirely valid, are unchanged by this MSC.

Perhaps @toger5 can chime in with the client behaviour of delayed `m.call.notify` events?

Author: On the ordering concern, have added:

> Servers MUST send old sticky events in the order they were created on the server (stream ordering / based on `origin_server_ts`). This ensures that sticky events appear in roughly the right place in the timeline as servers use the arrival ordering to determine an event's position in the timeline.

Reviewer 4: The point is that I'm trying to figure out whether the new behaviour has negative side effects that we need to consider. We're moving away from the previous model for RTC events of "state" (i.e. last event wins), towards a model where a client sees all events in order, which inevitably affects the federation "catch up" model and the client UX.

> * You're concerned that if there are sticky map changes and we send them in age order, the sticky events will _potentially_ trickle down to clients because we don't have any kind of atomicity on the `/send` transaction. This may cause flickering on the UI, or a notification to misfire. I point out this happens today anyway with state events, and is unavoidable if we don't want to leak metadata to the server about which key in the sticky map we're modifying. If we did leak the key metadata, we could expire sticky events sender-side when they are replaced with new sticky events, so we wouldn't send old values over federation.

This only rarely happens for state events though (and generally we don't trigger notifications for state events either so in the rare cases it does happen we wouldn't notice it).

We don't see state events trickling in because once a server enters "catchup mode" we only send the latest event to the remote, and so the current state is updated *once* to the most recent value, and this comes down `/sync` in the `state` section (for SSS and when using `state_after`).

The only time we'd see tricking of state events is if federation didn't enter catchup mode and a bunch of state changes got sent in quick succession (i.e. federation was down for a short time). However, these events would generally apply a lot quicker as there are no gaps to go and request and process. We may nonetheless want to consider whether Synapse should try and batch up this persistence so that the current state only changes once to the most recent state value, depending on the semantics / UX we want from MatrixRTC.

> Yes, I expect a messaging protocol to fetch missed messages and to flag them as "live" if it has reason to believe that they are in fact recent, so I don't understand any concern there around why we are treating extra new messages as "live". We currently do a volumetric approach of forward extremities + N from `/get_missing_events` where we set N=10 which matches the default `/sync` timeline limit. Sticky events does change this behaviour indirectly, because we will now treat $every_pushed_sticky_event + N from `/get_missing_events` as recent _before_ we then process the forward extremities. As per the ordering comment, we will push sticky events first then the forwards extremity so the timeline presented on `/sync` will be the same as before.
>
> I don't really know what your point is.

Err, the point is exactly what you just said? You're changing how we catchup after a gap works, which may have a direct impact on stability and UX. At the very least we have seen issues with having multiple forward extremities, even if work is happening to reduce the impact of them.

> I agree, though all I'm saying is this is not how MatrixRTC currently works. Sticky events isn't trying to solve every problem. It's primarily trying to solve how to reliably sync RTC member events without using room state. If it can be applied elsewhere, great, but this should not detract from the primary use case. This is somewhat evasive on purpose because _in general_ we have a problem with how we decide which events are "live" (and hence has push notifications applied) and which are not. In an increasingly encrypted world, we will likely end up pushing for everything (EX is already half way down this road) which rather makes this problem moot.

How users get notified about a call feels very front-and-centre for MatrixRTC tbh, and if all the other events get enhanced delivery it feels odd if the `notify` event doesn't as well. Though maybe there are good reasons for it not to? It feels like something that we should consider, even if its to say "you shouldn't notify on sticky events".

Reviewer 4: Have split them up https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354#pullrequestreview-3314968801

is distinct from that of delayed events. The purpose of the sticky duration in this proposal is to ensure sticky events are cleaned up.

### Implementing a map

MatrixRTC relies on a per-user, per-device map of RTC member events. To implement this, this MSC proposes
a standardised mechanism for determining keys on sticky events, the `content.sticky_key` property:

```js
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 300000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": {
        "sticky_key": "LAPTOPXX123",
        ...
    }
}
```

`content.sticky_key` is ignored server-side[^encryption] and is purely informational. Clients which
receive a sticky event with a sticky key SHOULD keep a map with keys determined via the 4-uple
`(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` to track the current values in the map. Nothing stops
users sending multiple events with the same `sticky_key`. To deterministically tie-break, clients which
implement this behaviour MUST:

- pick the one with the highest `origin_server_ts`,  
- tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

> When overwriting keys, clients SHOULD use the same sticky duration as the previous sticky event to avoid clients diverging.

Author: >  It means sending a new event with the same sticky_key as a previous one?

Yes. More specifically the same _sender_ in the same _room_ (the 4-uple is the key). 

> overwrites it with the same key K’ so K == K'? Should it sticky event S of sticky_key K "replaced" by a new Sticky Event S' with the same key K

Yeah, what I really mean is the same key K with a different value V. Will fix, thanks.

> And we want to avoid two active sticky events with the same key where the older event expiration time is greater than the new one? 

Correct. We want to guarantee all servers progress forwards through time. To illustrate this:
```
Event        Lifetime
  S       [=========|==]  |
  S'           [====|=====|=]
                    |     |
                    A     B
```
At the time A, the possible states on clients is `{ _, S, S'}` where `_` is nothing due to not seeing either event. At time B, the possible states on clients is `{ _, S'}`.

Contrast with:
```
Event        Lifetime
  S       [=======|====|=]
  S'           [==|=]  |
                  |    |
                  A    B
```
Just like before, at time A the possible states are `{ _, S, S'}`, but now at time B the possible states are `{ _, S }`. 

This is problematic if you're trying to agree on the "latest" values, like you would in a k:v map.

        "sticky": {
            "events": [
                {
                    "sender": "@bob:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
                    "content": { ... }
                },
                {
                    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920311020,
                    "content": { ... }
                }
            ]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

```

Over Simplified Sliding Sync, Sticky Events have their own extension `sticky_events`, which has the following response shape:

```js
{
  "rooms": {
      "!726s6s6q:example.com": {
          "events": [{
              "sender": "@bob:example.com",
              "type": "m.foo",
              "sticky": {
                "duration_ms": 300000
              },
              "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
              "content": { ... }
          }]
      }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: For normal state we allow filtering by type, do we want the same here? E.g. only requesting events whose type the client understands.

Author: Almost certainly not because we want these events to be encrypted so you can't provide any sensible filtering on type.

[^newjoiner]: We restrict delivery of sticky events to ones sent locally to reduce the number of events sent on join. If
we sent all active sticky events then the number of received events by the new joiner would be `O(nm)` where `n` = number of joined servers,
`m` = number of active sticky events.
[^ordering]: Sticky events expose gaps in the timeline which cannot be expressed using the current sync API. If sync used
something like [stitched ordering](https://codeberg.org/andybalaam/stitched-order)
or [MSC3871](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3871) then sticky events could be inserted straight
into the timeline without any additional section, hence “MAY” would enable this behaviour in the future.  
[^encryption]: Previous versions of this proposal had the key be at the top-level of the event JSON so servers could
implement map-like semantics on client’s behalf. However, this would force the key to remain visible to the server and
thus leak metadata. As a result, the key now falls within the encrypted `content` payload, and clients are expected to

> implement the map-like semantics should they wish to.  

Reviewer 4: It feels unfortunate that the outcome of this is that for an hour after the start of a call that has ended, there will be a large number of useless events in the `sticky` section.

option to do this since 2019). Alternatively, servers MAY choose not to add old sticky events to their forward extremities, but
this A) reduces eventual delivery guarantees by reducing the frequency of transitive delivery of events, B) reduces the convergence
rate when implementing ephemeral maps (see "Implementing an ephemeral map"), as that relies on servers referencing sticky events from other servers.

### Implementing an ephemeral map

MatrixRTC relies on a per-user, per-device map of RTC member events. To implement this, this MSC proposes
a standardised mechanism for determining keys on sticky events, the `content.sticky_key` property:

```js
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 300000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": {
        "sticky_key": "LAPTOPXX123",
        ...
    }
}
```

`content.sticky_key` is ignored server-side[^encryption] and is purely informational. Clients which
receive a sticky event with a sticky key SHOULD keep a map with keys determined via the 4-uple

> `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` to track the current values in the map. Nothing stops

Author: > I am starting to wonder if the map needs to be part of the MSC at all. It is good to have it as an example but in the end this is very use case specific.

You're right, but I still think it should be in this MSC. We should be helping readers to know how the new temporal delivery guarantee is used in practice by the layer on top. This helps calibrate why certain design decisions were made, and proves that the design can work for real-world scenarios and isn't just some abstract hypothetical problem we're trying to solve.

> `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` to track the current values in the map. Nothing stops

Reviewer 5: Since the idea of sticky events (also the motivation) is reasoned around sending per-user per-device room state. I think the default Map implementation should mimic room state as much as possible being a KV store, such that we have a default goto proposal how to implement this. 

its also useful if not every MSC ontop of sticky events does implement a map or a KV store slightly differently. Maybe we can phrase it such that if you just need a MAP you can commit the type.
to mimic

users sending multiple events with the same `sticky_key`. To deterministically tie-break, clients which
implement this behaviour MUST:

- pick the one with the highest `origin_server_ts`,  
- tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

> Clients SHOULD expire sticky events in maps when their stickiness ends. They should use the algorithm described in this proposal

Author: They serve different purposes. The stickiness timeout is for delivery. The underlying timeout is for the application. You want the stickiness timeout to be at least as long as the application timeout, else you'd lose enhanced delivery guarantees whilst the event is still relevant from an application perspective.

In an ideal world, yes, you would tie the two together as you have no need for the enhanced delivery guarantees, but in practice this isn't how applications like MatrixRTC work. There **isn't a timeout** on the RTC member event. Instead, the client sends a delayed "hangup" event which it keeps alive, and then if the client fails to keep alive the server sends the "hangup" event. We don't know when the expired RTC member event will fire, as it depends on the connectivity between the client and the server. As a result, we don't know how long the RTC member event will remain valid for at an application-level, but as we want to enforce ephemeral sticky events we still need to provide a timeout, hence why they are independent.

We could remove delayed events altogether and use the sticky timeout as the RTC keep-alive timeout but this would be inappropriate because:
 - we want to respond quickly if clients disappear, so want as short a timeout as possible for the keep-alive (I believe it's 30s today), so
 - you'd need to renew the RTC member event every 30s to keep it alive,
 - and over federation it could take much longer than 30s for messages to arrive, resulting in people spontaneously being chucked off the call and then rejoining.

> Clients SHOULD expire sticky events in maps when their stickiness ends. They should use the algorithm described in this proposal

Reviewer 4: > In an ideal world, yes, you would tie the two together as you have no need for the enhanced delivery guarantees, but in practice this isn't how applications like MatrixRTC work. There **isn't a timeout** on the RTC member event. Instead, the client sends a delayed "hangup" event which it keeps alive, and then if the client fails to keep alive the server sends the "hangup" event.

I mean, that sounds like MatrixRTC using the primitives it has access to to build a system which is basically "keep this member event alive while I am connected, and have it immediately expire when I stop"?

Like, right now a client has to:

1. Send the initial member event.
2. Send the hangup event as delayed
3. Repeatedly delay hangup event
4. Also resend member event every hour.

Which works, but feels like a convoluted way of getting the semantics we want, i.e. "send a member event and everyone sees it as valid while its kept alive via a heartbeat". 

While yeah, totally get why you want different timeouts between the heartbeat/keepalive part and the timeouts for the rest, the delay for sticky events really does feel tied to the heartbeats? In that when the heartbeat goes away you also want to expire the sticky events.

That's not to say you can't make MatrixRTC on top of tow entirely separate "sticky events" and "delayed events" concepts, its just it feels like it ends up being a bit janky.

> Clients SHOULD expire sticky events in maps when their stickiness ends. They should use the algorithm described in this proposal

Author: If sticky events were useless on their own and delayed events were useless on their own then I'd agree that it's janky as you need a particular incantation to get things to behave the way you want.

However, delayed events aren't just a heartbeat mechanism, and are used by other people for self-destructing events. Similarly, sticky event's delivery guarantees are useful for intentional mentions and live location sharing (which has no need for an "expired" location event).

> that sounds like MatrixRTC using the primitives it has access to to build a system which is basically ""?

Exactly, we have a composable API which can be used in novel ways for different use cases, rather than a dedicated API for each specific use case. Dedicated APIs can present a cleaner interface, but tend to not be able to be combined with other APIs, limiting the overall flexibility of the underlying protocol.

If we wanted to actually have composable semantics for "keep this member event alive while I am connected, and have it immediately expire when I stop" we would need the concept of a connection to begin with, which we don't really have unless you assume everyone uses /sync. If we did, then yes something like MQTTs Last Will and Testament events would be a good addition I think.

to determine if an event is still sticky. Clients may diverge if they do not expire sticky events as in the following scenario:
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    HS1->>+HS2: Sticky event S (1h sticky)
    HS2->>Client: Sticky event S (1h sticky)
    HS2->>-HS1: OK
    HS2->>+HS2: Goes offline
    HS1->>+HS2: Sticky event S' (1h sticky)
    HS1->>+HS2: Retry Sticky event S' (1h sticky)
    HS1->>+HS2: Retry Sticky event S' (1h sticky)
    HS1->>HS1: Sticky event S' expires
    HS2->>HS2: Back online
    Client->>Client: Sticky event S still valid!
```

> When clients create multiple events with the same `sticky_key`, they SHOULD use the same sticky duration as the previous

Reviewer 2: Noting a discussion I had with @toger5 is that we might not want to do a sticky_key at all. Instead, it would probably be better if we just had a limit on the number of sticky events an individual user can send per room ( / account?). The sticky key / map structure  feels more like an implementation detail for clients to deal with, rather than something for the sever to care about.

This does present the risk that we are unable to expire events as per https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354/files#r2379606595, but due to the limitation that we can't remove or lower the duration as per this spec, maybe it doesn't matter. 

For example, Matrix RTC should probably just listen for events that are the same [type, sender, application_specific_call_id] and expire older events.

Reviewer 2: This is the same conversation as https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354#discussion_r2379624720, bleh.

Other proposals have similar problems such as live location sharing which uses state events when it
really just wants per-user last-write-wins behaviour.

There currently exists no good communication primitive in Matrix to send this kind of data. EDUs are
almost the right primitive, but:

* They can’t be sent via clients (there is no concept of EDUs in the Client-Server API\!
  [MSC2477](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2477) tries to change that)  
* They aren’t extensible.   
* They do not guarantee delivery. Each EDU type has slightly different persistence/delivery guarantees,
  all of which currently fall short of guaranteeing delivery, with the exception of to-device messages.

This proposal adds such a primitive, called Sticky Events, which provides the following guarantees:

* Eventual delivery (with timeouts) with convergence.  
* Access control tied to the joined members in the room.  
* Extensible, able to be sent by clients.

This new primitive can be used to implement MatrixRTC participation, live location sharing, among other functionality.

## Proposal

> Message events can be annotated with a new top-level `sticky` key[^toplevel], which MUST have a `duration_ms`,

Author: Good idea, this is an artifact of an earlier version which did not have a sticky object but really only had the sticky duration as the top level key.

* Extensible, able to be sent by clients.

This new primitive can be used to implement MatrixRTC participation, live location sharing, among other functionality.

## Proposal

Message events can be annotated with a new top-level `sticky` object[^toplevel], which MUST have a `duration_ms`,
which is the number of milliseconds for the event to be sticky. The presence of `sticky.duration_ms`
with a valid value makes the event “sticky”[^stickyobj]. Valid values are the integer range 0-3600000 (1 hour).
For use cases that require stickiness beyond this limit, the application is responsible for sending another
event to make it happen. The `sticky` key is not protected from redaction. A redacted sticky event is the same
as a normal event.

```json
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 600000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": { ... }
}
```

This key can be set by clients in the CS API by a new query parameter `stick_duration_ms`, which is
added to the following endpoints:

* `PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`

> * `PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}`

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354#discussion_r2371886244

* Ensure all sticky events are delivered to clients via `/sync` in a new section of the sync response,
  regardless of whether the sticky event falls within the timeline limit of the request.  
* When a new server joins the room, existing servers MUST attempt delivery of all of their own sticky events[^newjoiner].  
* Remember sticky events per-user, per-room such that the soft-failure checks can be re-evaluated.

When an event loses its stickiness, these properties disappear with the stickiness. Servers SHOULD NOT
eagerly synchronise such events anymore, nor send them down `/sync`, nor re-evaluate their soft-failure status.
Note: policy servers and other similar antispam techniques still apply to these events.

These messages may be combined with [MSC4140: Delayed Events](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4140)
to provide heartbeat semantics (e.g required for MatrixRTC). Note that the sticky duration in this proposal
is distinct from that of delayed events. The purpose of the sticky duration in this proposal is to ensure sticky events are cleaned up.

> ### Sync API changes

Author: I'll clarify, but I'm surprised it could be seen as anything other than Option 2. No other data type in sync behaves like this, possibly with the exception of OTK counts which are always returned in the response JSON?

to provide them. For this reason, it is not possible for servers to reliably deliver _other server's_ sticky events.

In the common case, sticky events are sent over federation like any other event and do not cause any behavioural changes.
The two cases where this is different is:
 - when sending sticky events to newly joined servers
 - when sending "old" but unexpired sticky events

Servers tend to maintain a sliding window of events to deliver to other servers e.g the most recent 50 PDUs. Sticky events
can fall outside this range, which is what we define as "old". On the receiving server, old events appear to have unknown
`prev_events`, which cannot be connected to any known part of the room DAG. Sending sticky events to newly joined servers can be seen
as a form of sending old but unexpired sticky events, and so this proposal only considers this case.

Servers MUST send old sticky events in the order they were created on the server (stream ordering / based on `origin_server_ts`).
This ensures that sticky events appear in roughly the right place in the timeline as servers use the arrival ordering to determine

> an event's position in the timeline.

Author: Yes. If there are 113 sticky events, and 2 forward extremities then the batches of 50 become:
 - sticky [0:50]
 - sticky [50:100]
 - sticky [100:113] + fwd [:]

Sending these old events will potentially increase the number of forward extremities in the room for the receiving server. This may impact state resolution
performance if there are many forward extremities. Servers MAY send dummy events to remove forward extremities (Synapse has the
option to do this since 2019). Alternatively, servers MAY choose not to add old sticky events to their forward extremities, but
this A) reduces eventual delivery guarantees by reducing the frequency of transitive delivery of events, B) reduces the convergence
rate when implementing ephemeral maps (see "Addendum: Implementing an ephemeral map"), as that relies on servers referencing sticky
events from other servers.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer: Do sticky events break history visibility rules? For example:

1. Room is created with history visibility `joined`
2. Server A sets an event as sticky for 1 hour
3. A few minutes later, Server B joins the room
4. Server A sends the sticky event to Server B

If history visibility is maintained, at step 4 the event will be *redacted*, which means the stickiness will be lost too. If history visibility is ignored, Server B can serve the event normally.

Assuming it's not a total nightmare to do, explicitly ignoring history visibility for sticky events (while they're sticky???) I think would be good. 

blocking for FCP; concern text:
> History visibility semantics need clarification/specification

Author: This is already covered in the text:

> They ignore history visibility checks. Any joined user is authorised to see sticky events for the duration they remain sticky.

As for why, the text covers this as well:

> This ensures that newly joined servers can see sticky events sent from before they were joined to the room, regardless of the history visibility setting. This matches the behaviour of state events. 

It's not too terrible to do in Synapse, as it just needs an extra flag to control whether we filter out history visibility checks.

As a consequence of this, the sticky duration SHOULD NOT be set to below 5 minutes.[^ttl] 

### Encryption

Encrypted sticky events reduce reliability as in order for a sticky event to be visible to the end user it
requires *both* the sending client to think the receiver is joined (so we encrypt for their devices) and the
receiving server to think the sender is joined (so it passes auth checks). Unencrypted events only strictly
require the receiving server to think the sender is joined.

The lack of historical room key sharing may make some encrypted sticky events undecryptable when new users join the room. 
[MSC4268: Sharing room keys for past messages](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4268) would
help with this.

### Spam

Servers may send every event as a sticky event, causing a higher amount of events to be sent eagerly over federation
and to be sent down `/sync` to clients. The former is already an issue as servers can simply `/send` many events.
The latter is a new abuse vector, as up until this point the `timeline_limit` would restrict the amount of events

> that arrive on client devices (only state events are unbounded and setting state is a privileged operation). Even so,

Reviewer 6: Removing might result in split brains client side. If one user already synced the event where another has not (and the oldest sticky event (with the metadata we have) can still be the newest event for a specifik sticky_key (since we do not expose the keys to the server (encrypted content))

Stopping clients to send new ones (or slowing them down significantly) might prohibit this for the cost of potentially unintended slow downs.
 - each call 2 events (for 1 hour)
 - slow down after 10 events
  - 5 calls per hour

> that arrive on client devices (only state events are unbounded and setting state is a privileged operation). Even so,

Author: >  If one user already synced the event where another has not (and the oldest sticky event (with the metadata we have) can still be the newest event for a specifik sticky_key

Yes, but I'm not convinced this is a likely occurence. The server would be keying off a partial key of `(room_id, user_id)` and not the full `(room_id, user_id, sticky_key)`. You would need:
 - the sender genuinely sending lots of traffic to trigger the abuse limit AND
 - the sender to be using sticky events for two distinct concepts at the time AND
 - where one of those concepts only infrequently sets the key AND
 - the other frequently sets the key.

I guess this may happen if you do a live location share (frequently sending sticky events) coupled with a MatrixRTC call (infrequently sending RTC member events)? We could potentially make this the client's problem and say "hey, you may want to resend your infrequent sticky events if you're going to be spamming"? Or something?

> that arrive on client devices (only state events are unbounded and setting state is a privileged operation). Even so,

Author: I'm not seeing your point. Is your concern more the debugability for when things go wrong, or a fundamental disagreement with having an abuse limit per-user-per-room?

The kind of limits I'm thinking of here are 900 sticky events per-user-per-room, which allows a rate of 1 sticky event per 4 seconds (over 1 hour 3600/4 = 900). Exceeding this number of active sticky events in any 1 rolling hour window would then cause the oldest (by `origin_server_ts`) to expire. This would allow bursts of sticky events. It's important to mention that this abuse limit _only applies to gappy syncs_. If you happened to sync 899 sticky events, then you receive 899 more over federation in 5 seconds then your next `/sync` will include those new events. It's not an absolute rate limit on the number of sent events.

I don't think any feature should be producing at a rate higher than that, and it provides an absolute upper boundary on the `/sync` impact (900 * 65535 bytes = ~58MB).

Some of these limits may not even be possible to hit today as we'll likely trigger federation or CSAPI rate limits first, so this is more defence-in-depth style additional protections should a limit be circumvented.

> that arrive on client devices (only state events are unbounded and setting state is a privileged operation). Even so,

Author: Added:

> Servers SHOULD return sticky events down /sync in batches if there are many sticky events to return in one go. This ensures that clients can always make forward progress and can't get into a death spiral of never being able to download a large /sync response. This MSC recommends a batch size of 100 sticky events per /sync response, across all rooms. This means at most ~6.5MB of the sync response will contain sticky events.

dropped updates for the latter scenario.

Servers may lie to their own clients about the `unsigned.sticky_duration_ttl_ms` value, with the aim of making
certain sticky events last longer or shorter than intended. Servers can already maliciously drop sticky events
to lose updates, and the lack of any verification of the event hash means servers can also maliciously alter the
`origin_server_ts`. Therefore, adding `unsigned.sticky_duration_ttl_ms` doesn't materially make the situation worse.
In the common case, it provides protection against clock skew when clients have the wrong time. 

## Unstable Prefix

- The `stick_duration_ms` query param is `msc4354_stick_duration_ms`.
- The `sticky` key in the PDU is `msc4354_sticky`.
- The `/sync` response section is `msc4354_sticky`.
- The sticky key in the `content` of the PDU is `msc4354_sticky_key`.
- To enable this in SSS, the extension name is `org.matrix.msc4354.sticky_events`.
- The `unsigned.sticky_duration_ttl_ms` field is `unsigned.msc4354_sticky_duration_ttl_ms`

## Addendum

This section explains how sticky events can be used to implement a short-lived, per-user, per-room key-value store.

> This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members.

Author: As in, should the addendum go in the spec?

Ideally yes, as it provides a higher level primitive for client authors to work with. I see this as similar conceptually to [calculating the display name for a room](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/client-server-api/#calculating-the-display-name-for-a-room). You don't _have_ to follow that algorithm, it's just nice if you did since then every client will agree on the room name. Likewise, you don't _have_ to follow the sticky map semantics, it's just nice if you did since then every client will agree on the map values.

> This section explains how sticky events can be used to implement a short-lived, per-user, per-room key-value store.
> This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members.

Reviewer: In that case, I suggest:
```suggestion
This section explains how sticky events can be used to implement a short-lived, per-user, per-room key-value store.
This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members, and should land in the spec as a suggested algorithm to follow.
```

certain sticky events last longer or shorter than intended. Servers can already maliciously drop sticky events
to lose updates, and the lack of any verification of the event hash means servers can also maliciously alter the
`origin_server_ts`. Therefore, adding `unsigned.sticky_duration_ttl_ms` doesn't materially make the situation worse.
In the common case, it provides protection against clock skew when clients have the wrong time. 

## Unstable Prefix

- The `sticky_duration_ms` query param is `org.matrix.msc4354.sticky_duration_ms`.
- The `sticky` key in the PDU is `msc4354_sticky`.
- The `/sync` response section is `msc4354_sticky`.
- The sticky key in the `content` of the PDU is `msc4354_sticky_key`.
- To enable this in SSS, the extension name is `org.matrix.msc4354.sticky_events`.
- The `unsigned.sticky_duration_ttl_ms` field is `unsigned.msc4354_sticky_duration_ttl_ms`

The `/versions` response in the CSAPI includes:
```json
{
    "versions": ["..."],
    "unstable_features": {
        "org.matrix.msc4354": true
    }
}
```

## Addendum

This section explains how sticky events can be used to implement a short-lived, per-user, per-room key-value store.

> This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members, and should land in the spec as a suggested algorithm to follow.

Reviewer 3: I think we should downgrade this from a RECOMMENDATION to an example. The concrete keying semantics seem highly use case specific to me. The 4-uple `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` and the tie-breaking logic outlined below may work for Matrix RTC. Other applications might have quite different requirements though. Specifying the local aggregation of sticky events should be left to features / MSCs using sticky events.

CC @toger5 with whom I chatted about this at the Matrix Community Summit.

Reviewer 7: I would argue that the quadrupel is similar to the triple of a state event and application agnostic. I know, that there are other opinions than mine, but I still think, that sticky events are technically "just" temporary member-controlled state events and then it make sense to have rules like this on how they are working and stored locally.

Reviewer 3: > [...] I still think, that sticky events are technically "just" temporary member-controlled state events [...]

I think that is exactly the question actually. Do we design sticky events as events with a state-event-like delivery guarantee and let applications do with them whatever they want? Or do we design them as state-like events with delivery guarantee _and_ map-like semantics?

It feels like MatrixRTC is going to be the only user of this feature for a while. So I'm leaning towards treating the map logic as a MatrixRTC specialty first from where we could easily generalize it to arbitrary event types later when we find other use cases.

Reviewer 7: Just because no other use cases are known doesn’t mean there aren’t any. Ultimately, it will have to be implemented for MatrixRTC anyway. I can’t see any reason why we shouldn’t make it available here as a general feature. Otherwise, applications will start misusing MatrixRTC for this purpose because it wasn’t defined as a general feature. From an implementation (SDK) perspective it is much closer to sticky events than to MatrixRTC: https://gitlab.com/connect2x/trixnity/trixnity/-/merge_requests/687

Reviewer 3: > Just because no other use cases are known doesn’t mean there aren’t any.

Yes, true. I just think we may want to be cautious with prescribing logic for use cases that we don't yet know about because we cannot validate that this logic will actually be suitable.

Ultimately, the only difference in what I'm proposing is an event type filter chucked in front of the local aggregation logic for sticky events so that it is only applied to the Matrix RTC events. It feels easier to extend or remove that filter in future when we find other usages than to go the other way around.

Author: @benkuly is right, the intention is to provide delivery **and map** guarantees matching that of state events.

The problem is, if we don't recommend this, SDK implementations may never expose the ability to replace based on keys, or if they do they leave the key name up in the air (`key` or `sticky_key` or `content.state_key` or something else). It's far easier to recommend names / replace semantics _now_ than to try to follow-up in N months with "oh well, use this key if you can, though X Y Z don't, but A B C do".

Reviewer 3: Yes, but that goes both ways. If we define generalized logic now and then follow-up in N months with exceptions for certain new features, that feels like exactly the same pickle just the other way around. I guess I'm finding it tricky to fully commit to this being the right logic for all use cases when we only know about one very specific one so far.

Author: The 4-uple key is designed this way to provide keying which is:
 - per-user (room ID, sender)
 - typed (type, sticky key)
 - coordination free (last-writer-wins)

So any feature which needs these properties would likely use the map as-is, such as:
 - live location sharing, where the sticky key determines the number of concurrent live location shares allowed (similar to MatrixRTC's slot system)
 - per-thread typing indicators, where the sticky key is the root thread ID (though we'd aggregate this over federation)
 - synchronised upload progress, where the sticky key is the event ID that contains the upload being uploaded
 - when you are recording voice message

Hopefully this gives you a better idea.

Reviewer 3: Ok, well fair enough on the use cases.

I'm trying to imagine how this would look in the spec though. I think the spec currently doesn't care about SDKs. It only targets clients. Why would we recommend a client to implement generic sticky event maps outside of features that the client actually supports (such as MatrixRTC)?

It feels like we'd want the RECOMMENDATION to apply to future features based on sticky events. But the only normative part in the spec would still be that clients MUST use this mapping algorithm for MatrixRTC only?

Reviewer 7: Why not do it the same as for other event flavors: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#types-of-room-events

Reviewer 3: Hm, I'm not sure how that would translate. There is no requirement or recommendation in there for clients to maintain a map of the latest known values of unknown state events. 🤔

Author: The spec makes many recommendations for extensibility (e.g. event type naming convention) and things like extensible events are a good example of "this is a convention/recommendation, please do it" where SDK developers know where they stand in terms of reading fields they support. I don't see the sticky event map recommendation as anything novel.

Reviewer 3: It seems novel to me because we're prescribing aggregation logic for speculative features, not just naming conventions. I'm personally not convinced that we'll gain much by trying to bake the 4-uple mapping algorithm into SDKs this way. The algorithm itself doesn't appear very complicated to me and if somebody really needs x-uples for their feature, that should be rather trivial to implement.

Anyway, I've made us spend a lot of words on a really small part of the proposal, sorry. 🙈

I'm not going to die on this hill. It just seems unnecessarily limiting to me.

Author: I'm confused why you think it's limiting. You can use sticky events without `content.sticky_key`. You're not forced to use ephemeral maps if you're using sticky keys. All it's doing is standardising map-like semantics so future features know they have this primitive they can make use of, which SDKs will already have anyway if they support MatrixRTC. Without this, the map-like semantics can be hidden away behind MatrixRTC and we'd see more MSCs adding the equivalent functionality.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is a nuance of how we'll write it into the spec. It sounded to me like it'll be a SHOULD for clients to maintain the generic map for any event with `content.sticky_key`.

Just defining it as a primitive (without normative language) and then having MatrixRTC be the only part of the spec that has normative MUSTs to use that primitive seems totally fine to me.

Reviewer 3: Trying to conclude on this. How about we clarify the language like this?

```suggestion
## Addendum

This section explains how sticky events can be used to implement a short-lived, per-user, per-room key-value store.
This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members, and should land in the spec as a (non-normative)
primitive with a recommendation to use it for future features.
```

### Implementing an ephemeral map

MatrixRTC relies on a per-user, per-device map of RTC member events. To implement this, this MSC proposes

> a standardised mechanism for determining keys on sticky events, the `content.sticky_key` property:

Reviewer 3: We're currently debating whether and how to chain a user's MatrixRTC membership events using relations. The current idea is that when a user joins an RTC session, they post their membership event without a relation. On any subsequent update of the membership event, a relation to the join event is added.

With that design we may not actually need `sticky_key` and could instead use the event ID of the join event (the related to event).

CC @toger5

Author: Relations don't work over federation reliably, what exactly is your proposed flow?

Reviewer 6: Right now we send a `sticky_key` as part of the encrypted content and let the client update the events based on that.
As there is no permanent sticky event the same keys can be reused later with different context.
Considering this it might be the more appropriate concept to use relation chains for mutating sticky items instead of a key based system?

The client logic would then automatically be:
 - there is only a set of sticky events. (no keyed map)
 - some of those items in the set might mutate as the sdk already does with edits (`m.replace`) anyway.

The flow:
 - join a call: send a new `m.rtc.member` sticky event
 - update your event (voice->video intent or just to not loose stickyness): send a m.rtc.member that `m.replace`s the old current one.
   - clients that have not yet synced immediately get the relation to the original join (which can help/is a different solution for call duration computation)
   - clients that already know about the soon expiring sticky event will emit an edit event on the MatrixEvent obj abstraction. (mutate the existing sticky item in the set)
 - The expiration can then be done per event. The original event expires but the edit event remains -> sticky event is still part of the set in the edited state. Which is another way to implement the current sticky expiration logic. (which might be simpler)

I think over federation this is equally stable as the sticky_key approach.
I think it is in general almost equivalent to the sticky_key approach but
 - sticky key = `event_id` OR `m.relates_to`.`event_id`
 - the sticky key is not encrypted anymore but still the metadata is blurred as we dont know if a relation is a m.room.message edit of a sticky m.room.message event or a call update.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I think over federation it should work the same way `sticky_key` does given that both are transmitted as part of the event JSON.

If we're already using relations to chain the events anyway, that would spare us introducing another random number `sticky_key` property. The case where it wouldn't work is when the first sticky event already carries another relation (such as `m.rtc.notification` relating to the sender's `m.rtc.member` event).

Reviewer 6: > The case where it wouldn't work is when the first sticky event already carries another relation (such as m.rtc.notification relating to the sender's m.rtc.member event).

If it would not be `m.replace` but a `m.reference` relation it should still work as described?
The `m.rtc.notification` and the `m.rtc.member` events would be a separate entries in the "sticky set".

Reviewer 3: Hm, so the compound key is `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)`. If we assume the room ID and sending user to stay constant, we'll only need to look at the event type and the sticky key. When a user sends their member event, then updates it, then sends a notification event, then updates it, we'd have the following sub-keys:

|Event type|Sticky key|
|---|---|
| `m.rtc.member` (initial event) | `$memberEventId` (from `content`) |
| `m.rtc.member` (update) | `$memberEventId` (from `m.relates_to`) |
| `m.rtc.notification` (initial event) | `$memberEventId` (from `m.relates_to`) |
| `m.rtc.notification` (update) | `$notificationEventId` (from `m.relates_to`) |

That would produce 3 entries in the map. So there would be no collision but the state of the notification event is now split across two map entries?

Author: I'm confused in a few ways:
 - "sticky key = event_id OR m.relates_to.event_id" => Why is the sticky key just the event ID? Last I heard it was the device ID? That's what this MSC is suggesting. What is the underlying event for this event ID? Why the change from device ID to event ID, and have you considered the downsides to changing to a mutable string (an event ID) than a static identifier (the device ID)?
 - Using relations leaks metadata to the server. The server doesn't need to do a lot to guess that you're on an RTC call if it sees a bunch of relations occuring at roughly the expiration time. We need to justify why leaking metadata is acceptable.
 - "Considering this it might be the more appropriate concept to use relation chains for mutating sticky items instead of a key based system?" - what is the underlying requirement for MatrixRTC? A map or a log? If it's a map, why move to a log based system? These are quite different data types so it's a bit worrying if this is changing at this stage?

The underlying primitives you have to work with afaict are:
 - A set of sticky events,
 - ..some of which correspond to the same underlying RTC identity,
 - ..which you are interested in the _latest_ value for each identity.

The current approach does this via a k:v map with a compound key `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` where the key is encrypted and the timestamp is used for last-writer-win semantics.

The relation approach does this via a linked list (log) of relations, which is exposed to the server, and **can be manipulated by the server**, as it has to be unencrypted as per the spec:

> If an encrypted event contains an m.relates_to in its payload, it should be ignored and instead favour the cleartext m.relates_to copy (including when there is no cleartext copy). This is to ensure the client’s behaviour matches the server’s capability to handle relationships.

Whilst a server can also manipulate the timestamp on events, the entire point of making the sticky key encrypted is to ensure the server can't know which are RTC-related events and which are boring old normal messages.

It might be worth moving this discussion over the MatrixRTC MSC.

Reviewer 3: I think we're misunderstanding each other. This wasn't about changing the mapping logic but only about where to pick the sticky key from on events. Right now it comes from a property `sticky_key`.

On membership events, MatrixRTC sets that property to a UUID so it carries no further meaning in itself other than being unique. MatrixRTC also currently chains its membership events using relations. The idea is to take the sticky key from the event ID in the relation (or lacking that, the event's own event ID) instead of from `sticky_key`. Everything else stays the same.

I think this may not be specific to MatrixRTC though. For one thing, updating a sticky event semantically aligns with [event replacements](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#event-replacements). So using `m.replace` relations feels fitting. For another, chaining the events together with relations also has the benefit that you can query them using the `/relations` API which could make some operations faster.

The downsides are:

- This won't work if the first sticky event needs to relate to another event.
- The server has visibility on the relations. (It also has visibility on the usage of sticky events though. So as long as we're using a generic relation type, this doesn't leak more than before.)
- The server could fake the relations. (It could also fake `origin_server_ts` though).

Reviewer 7: Just for understanding: How would you expect to persist sticky events from an SDK (MatrixRTC agnostic) perspective then? As a flat list? And the MatrixRTC implementation should find out which event "wins"?

Reviewer 3: None of the other rules would change. I'm merely suggesting to swap `sticky_key` with `m.relates_to["event_id"]` in the algorithm. The same value would still require tie breaking using the rules from the proposal:

> - pick the one with the highest `origin_server_ts + sticky.duration_ms` (last to expire wins),  
> - tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

Author: > this doesn't leak more than before

This isn't true though? One exposes "this is one sticky event among many" and the other is "this _specifically relates to_ this event right here".

> MatrixRTC also currently chains its membership events using relations.

Please be specific. What are "membership events"? `m.room.member`? RTC members? It's confusing because this thread uses terminology like "use the event ID of the join event".

What is the compound key for RTC members _in general_? One RTC session per... device? Not specified? Can you actually have multiple sessions on a single device?

> chaining the events together with relations also has the benefit that you can query them using the /relations API which could make some operations faster.

Yes, but it baffles me why you'd do this without a use case for historical relations for the same RTC member?

----

From my position, it sounds very much like "hey, we're using the "membership event" ID as the `sticky_key`, let's just use relations?" without really thinking through if it makes sense to do. Like, the obvious _advantage_ to this approach is that a [gappy sync will return the latest event](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/client-server-api/#server-side-aggregation-of-mreplace-relationships) which is also a sharp edge case: the replace semantics there don't match the replace semantics of sticky events (`origin_server_ts + sticky.duration_ms` (last to expire wins)), so in some (all?) cases you'd be _forced_ to walk back earlier edits to ensure you are in fact tracking the last to expire event.

Reviewer 3: > > this doesn't leak more than before
> 
> This isn't true though? One exposes "this is one sticky event among many" and the other is "this _specifically relates to_ this event right here".

True, yes. I missed that. This isn't ideal but evidently we already accepted this shortcoming for the other usages of relations in the spec such as threads.

> > MatrixRTC also currently chains its membership events using relations.
> 
> Please be specific. What are "membership events"? `m.room.member`? RTC members? It's confusing because this thread uses terminology like "use the event ID of the join event".

Apologies for being sloppy with words. What #4143 currently proposes is:

```
m.rtc.member (initial event / join RTC session)
^                 ^
| m.reference     | m.reference
|                 |
m.rtc.member      |
(update due to    |
transport change  |
etc.)             |
                  |
                  |
                  |
                  m.rtc.member
                  (disconnect
                  from session)
```

As per #4143 this is using `m.reference` but we have been debating switching to `m.replace`. Conceptually this is the same though. Hopefully that makes it clear.

> What is the compound key for RTC members _in general_? One RTC session per... device? Not specified? Can you actually have multiple sessions on a single device?

#4143 uses the mapping algorithm as specified in the addendum of this proposal. So the compound key is `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)`. `content.sticky_key` is a UUID that is determined when sending the initial `m.rtc.member` member event to join a session. That means you can have multiple session on a single device.
 
> > chaining the events together with relations also has the benefit that you can query them using the /relations API which could make some operations faster.
> 
> Yes, but it baffles me why you'd do this without a use case for historical relations for the same RTC member?

The use case in MatrixRTC that we were discussing is reconstructing historical sessions, e.g. for a call history archive.

> From my position, it sounds very much like "hey, we're using the "membership event" ID as the `sticky_key`, let's just use relations?" without really thinking through if it makes sense to do. Like, the obvious _advantage_ to this approach is that a [gappy sync will return the latest event](https://spec.matrix.org/latest/client-server-api/#server-side-aggregation-of-mreplace-relationships) which is also a sharp edge case: the replace semantics there don't match the replace semantics of sticky events (`origin_server_ts + sticky.duration_ms` (last to expire wins)), so in some (all?) cases you'd be _forced_ to walk back earlier edits to ensure you are in fact tracking the last to expire event.

Well I opened this thread with the intention of us collectively thinking through if using relations to eliminate `sticky_key` is a sensible thing to do. So thank you for your feedback.

@toger5 and I will sync up on this.

Reviewer 3: Given that with relations the server has visibility on both the event being sticky and the sticky key (from the relation), what if the server would reject sending sticky events when the sticky duration would make the event expire before the related-to event?

This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members, and should land in the spec as a suggested algorithm to follow.

### Implementing an ephemeral map

MatrixRTC relies on a per-user, per-device map of RTC member events. To implement this, this MSC proposes
a standardised mechanism for determining keys on sticky events, the `content.sticky_key` property:

```js
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 300000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": {
        "sticky_key": "LAPTOPXX123",
        ...
    }
}
```

`content.sticky_key` is ignored server-side[^encryption] and is purely informational. Clients which
receive a sticky event with a `sticky_key` SHOULD keep a map with keys determined via the 4-uple[^3uple]
`(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` to track the current values in the map. Nothing stops
users sending multiple events with the same `sticky_key`. To deterministically tie-break, clients which
implement this behaviour MUST:

- pick the one with the highest `origin_server_ts`,  

> - tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

Author: > Why is the relative order of two sticky events given by the timestamps and event IDs rather than their relative order in /sync responses?

Because there are no guarantees that the relative order in `/sync` will actually be correct temporally, particularly when you consider transitive delivery. For example, consider:
 - 3 servers A, B, C in the same room. Each server with 1 user for simplicity, all joined to the same room.
 - User A sends a sticky messages `Sa1` and `Sa2`. They only arrive on B as C is offline.
 - User B sends a sticky message `Sb` with `prev_events: [Sa2]`. It arrives on all servers.
 - Server C does `/get_missing_events` to walk up the graph and pulls in `Sa2` only.
 - Server C is going to return a timeline section of `[Sa2, Sb]` to its users.
 - Server A retries sending `Sa1` and `Sa2` to Server C and succeeds.
 - Server C de-dupes and ignores reprocessing `Sa2` and processes `Sa1`.
 - Server C's timeline/arrival order is `[Sa2, Sb, Sa1]`.

As a result, this means whilst Server A sent the events `Sa1` then `Sa2`, the arrival order on Server C is the opposite. This clearly won't converge.

> This suggests that it's possible for a client to send two sticky events A, B in rapid enough succession that B ultimately fails to take precedence over A, which is a surprising outcome IMO.

Yes, the reliance on `A < Z` tie-breaks means two events sent in the same millisecond will give a 50/50 chance of ordering the 2nd event 1st. This is unfortunate. I can add some prose to warn of this behaviour.

> - tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

Reviewer 8: Thanks, I understand now. That is an unfortunate gotcha. Do you think suggesting a server-side mitigation of delaying the event creation by 1 ms when two sticky events clash would be overkill here?

> - tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

Author: This shouldn't really be on the server to do this. Clients who want to ensure that their spammed sticky events produce the right replacement operations should delay sending their events by 1ms if it's important.

> - tie break on the one with the highest lexicographical event ID (A < Z).

Author: Added:

> If a client sends two sticky events in the same millisecond, the 2nd event may be replaced by the 1st if the event ID of the 1st event has a higher lexicographical event ID. To protect against this, clients should ensure that they wait at least 1 millisecond between sending sticky events.

sticky events that are not useful. MatrixRTC defines an `m.rtc.member` event with an empty content (and optional `leave_reason`)
as having [left the session](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/toger5/matrixRTC/proposals/4143-matrix-rtc.md#leaving-a-session).
This is conceptually the same as deleting a key from the map. However, as the server is unaware of the `sticky_key`, it
cannot perform the delete operation for clients, and will instead send the empty content event down `/sync`. This means if
N users leave a call, there will be N sticky events present in `/sync` for the sticky duration specified.

This is the tradeoff for providing the ability to encrypt sticky events to reduce metadata visible to the server. It's worth
noting that this increase in inactionable sticky events only applies in a small time window. Had the client synced earlier when the
call was active, then the `m.rtc.member` events would be actionable. Had the client synced later when the inactionable sticky events
had expired, then the client wouldn't see them at all.

#### Access control

> If a client wishes to implement access control in this key-value map based on the power levels event,

Reviewer 9: Is there a PL for sending sticky event?

Author: The reason why there isn't is because it's ultimately redundant. We have existing tooling to handle users who abuse sending normal events: they get kicked and/or banned. The same tooling works for sticky event abuse.

# MSC4354: Sticky Events

MatrixRTC currently depends on [MSC3757](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3757)
for sending per-user per-device state. MatrixRTC wants to be able to share a temporary state to all
users in a room to indicate whether the given client is in the call or not. 

The concerns with MSC3757 and using it for MatrixRTC are mainly:

1. In order to ensure other users are unable to modify each other’s state, it proposes using
   string packing for authorization which feels wrong, given the structured nature of events.  
2. Allowing unprivileged users to send arbitrary amounts of state into the room is a potential
   abuse vector, as these states can pile up and can never be cleaned up as the DAG is append-only.  
3. State resolution can cause rollbacks. These rollbacks may inadvertently affect per-user per-device state.

Other proposals have similar problems such as live location sharing which uses state events when it

> really just wants per-user last-write-wins behaviour.

Reviewer 10: I found this very hard to parse.

```suggestion
[MSC3489](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3489) ("Sharing streams of location
data with history", AKA "live location sharing") has similar problems: it uses state events when it
really just needs per-user last-write-wins behaviour.
```

There currently exists no good communication primitive in Matrix to send this kind of data. EDUs are

> almost the right primitive, but:

Reviewer 10: > EDUs are almost the right primitive

Are they? It's hard to see how the `m.device_list_update` EDU would be helpful here, event if it could be sent by clients.

* They can’t be sent via clients (there is no concept of EDUs in the Client-Server API\!
  [MSC2477](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2477) tries to change that)  

> * They aren’t extensible.   

Author: You can't add arbitrary keys to the EDUs that currently do exist.

* They do not guarantee delivery. Each EDU type has slightly different persistence/delivery guarantees,
  all of which currently fall short of guaranteeing delivery, with the exception of to-device messages.

This proposal adds such a primitive, called Sticky Events, which provides the following guarantees:

* Eventual delivery (with timeouts) with convergence.  
* Access control tied to the joined members in the room.  
* Extensible, able to be sent by clients.

> This new primitive can be used to implement MatrixRTC participation, live location sharing, among other functionality.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This new primitive can be used to implement MatrixRTC participation and live location sharing, among other functionality.
```

```json
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 600000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": { ... }
}
```

This key can be set by clients in the CS API by a new query parameter `sticky_duration_ms`, which is
added to the following endpoints:

* [`PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#put_matrixclientv3roomsroomidsendeventtypetxnid)
* [`PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#put_matrixclientv3roomsroomidstateeventtypestatekey)

To calculate if any sticky event is still sticky:

* Calculate the start time:  
  * The start time is `min(now, origin_server_ts)`. This ensures that malicious origin timestamps cannot
    specify start times in the future.  
  * If the event is pushed over federation via `/send`, servers MAY use the current time as the start time instead. This minimises

>     the risk of clock skew causing the start time to be too far in the past. See “Potential issues \> Time”.  

Reviewer 10: I'm not entirely following why this is allowed for events sent over `/send`, but not those received via, say, `get_missing_events`.

* Calculate the end time as `start_time + min(sticky_duration_ms, 3600000)`.  
* If the end time is in the future, the event remains sticky.

Sticky events are like normal message events and are authorised using normal PDU checks. They have the
following _additional_ properties[^prop]:

* They are eagerly synchronised with all other servers.[^partial]  
* They must appear in the `/sync` response.[^sync]  
* The soft-failure checks MUST be re-evaluated when the membership state changes for a user with unexpired sticky events.[^softfail]
* They ignore history visibility checks. Any joined user is authorised to see sticky events for the duration they remain sticky.[^hisvis]

To implement these properties, servers MUST:

> * Attempt to send their own[^origin] sticky events to all joined servers, whilst respecting per-server backoff times.

Author: The impact here is it's a DoS risk right?

A user can't unilaterally do that unless they can manipulate the connection between two servers, which feels a bit of a stretch. We lack any kind of threat model here to know if this is something we should care about 🤷🏼 but at least in my view if you can control the connection then you're likely a server admin of one of the servers, in which case this opens up no additional weakness. If you're just a user, then this attack can't be reliably done - if you can DoS one of the servers to take them offline then uh.. well, that's just an easier way of doing this, since the attack is also a DoS :S in other words I just don't see how this is concretely affecting anything which isn't affected already?

                    "sender": "@bob:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
                    "content": { ... }
                },
                {
                    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920311020,
                    "content": { ... }
                }
            ]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
Sticky messages MAY be sent in the timeline section of the `/sync` response, regardless of whether
or not they exceed the timeline limit[^ordering]. If a sticky event is in the timeline, it MAY be
omitted from the `sticky.events` section. This ensures we minimise duplication in the `/sync` response JSON.

Sticky events follow the same 'stream-like' behaviour as the `timeline`. This means clients will receive a sticky
event S _once_, and subsequent requests with an advanced `since` token will not return the same sticky event S.

> When sending sticky events down `/sync`, the `unsigned` section SHOULD have a `sticky_duration_ttl_ms` to indicate

Reviewer 10: > SHOULD have a `sticky_duration_ttl_ms` 

would be good to include that in the example above, then

silently drop sticky events and return 200 OK from `/send`, as this breaks the eventual delivery guarantee.
Care must be taken with this approach as all the PDUs in the transaction will be retried, even ones for different rooms / not sticky events.
Servers solely relying on this option will need to consider that sticky events may be transitively delivered by a 3rd server.

Option B means servers have to store the sticky event in their database, protecting bandwidth at the cost of more disk usage.
This provides fine-grained control over when to deliver the sticky events to clients as the server doesn't need
to wait for another request. Servers SHOULD deliver the event to clients before the sticky event expires. This may not
always be possible if the remaining time is very short.

Servers SHOULD return sticky events down `/sync` in batches if there are many sticky events to return in one go.
This ensures that clients can always make forward progress and can't get into a death spiral of never being able to
download a large `/sync` response. This MSC recommends a batch size of 100 sticky events per `/sync` response, across

> all rooms. This means at most ~6.5MB of the sync response will contain sticky events.

Reviewer 10: this paragraph should probably be in the section about "Sync API changes", not here

### Federation behaviour

> Servers are only responsible for sending sticky events originating from their own server. This ensures the server is aware

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
As with regular events, servers are only responsible for sending sticky events originating from their own server. This ensures the server is aware
```

As such, this proposal relies somewhat on NTP to ensure clocks over federation are roughly in sync.
As a consequence of this, the sticky duration SHOULD NOT be set to below 5 minutes.[^ttl] 

### Encryption

Encrypted sticky events reduce reliability as in order for a sticky event to be visible to the end user it
requires *both* the sending client to think the receiver is joined (so we encrypt for their devices) and the
receiving server to think the sender is joined (so it passes auth checks). Unencrypted events only strictly
require the receiving server to think the sender is joined.

The lack of historical room key sharing may make some encrypted sticky events undecryptable when new users join the room. 
[MSC4268: Sharing room keys for past messages](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4268) would
help with this.

### Spam

Servers may send every event as a sticky event, causing a higher amount of events to be sent eagerly over federation
and to be sent down `/sync` to clients. The former is already an issue as servers can simply `/send` many events.

> The latter is a new abuse vector, as up until this point the `timeline_limit` would restrict the amount of events

Reviewer 11: ### Unbounded number of sticky events in Sliding Sync response

In the current Simplified Sliding Sync extension [implementation](https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/18968) in Synapse, it will return *all* unexpired sticky events in the room on initial sync. And is also unbounded for incremental syncs.

For example, it doesn't seem fine to return 100k+ sticky events. The problem is the amount of work and time needed to come up with the giant 100k response and the amount of network effort to get that back to the client. It's the same reason why we have a `timeline_limit` for `timeline` events. One may say that this won't happen because of rate-limits, etc but seems possible for a large public event room. *Anyone* can send a sticky event and we already have examples of large rooms.

### Adding a limit

At a minimum, I think we need some limit and a new endpoint to paginate further.

### Going further

We're tackling similar problems across a few MSC's now:

 - `thread_subscriptions`: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4308
 - `threads` https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4360
 - `sticky_events`: (this MSC)

This feels like the exact same problem as the `threads` extension. In both of these cases, we are trying to tackle the same problem of gathering a subset of the events in the `timeline`. Here is what I previously wrote about it:

> I think the better way to go about is to apply the same pattern that we just worked through with [thread subscriptions](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4308). We would need a few things:
> 
> - A way to return the new sticky events in `/sync`
> - Dedicated `sticky_events_limited` flag when there are other sticky events that we didn't return
> - A pagination endpoint for the sticky events
> 
> To be more detailed, these could be normal `timeline` events. If there are more sticky events in between the given sync token and the current position, we set the `sticky_events_limited` flag. For the pagination endpoint, we could overload `/messages` with a new filter.
>
> *-- @MadLittleMods, [internal room](https://matrix.to/#/!vvWZSNiEDRDfsyFZfa:matrix.org/$OBWJFRGwD0ykF_xOGyGZBgbeQvGYXkUumdi-fj2V5-k?via=matrix.org&via=t2l.io&via=element.io)*

With some more thinking on the subject, the dedicated Sliding Sync extension worked well for `thread_subscriptions` because `thread_subscriptions` aren't part of the response already.

Whereas with sticky events and thread updates, they are already part of the `timeline`.

 
> To break down the list of things needed (as listed above) and my current thinking:
> 
> #### "A way to return the new sticky events in `/sync`"
> 
> In the case of threads and sticky events, these events are already included as part of the `timeline` and `/sync` already keeps you up to date with all of the events.
> 
> #### "A pagination endpoint for the sticky events"
> 
> The dedicated [pagination endpoint] makes sense to back-paginate the gaps (whenever the `timeline` is `limited: true`)
> 
> #### "Dedicated `sticky_events_limited` flag when there are other sticky events that we didn't return"
> 
> With more thinking, I think this one is optional.
> 
> We could have an extension that indicates whether [`sticky_events_limited`] but this only saves a few extra requests in the cases where the `timeline` is `limited: true` but there weren't actually any new thread updates in the gap.
> 
> *-- @MadLittleMods, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4360#discussion_r2436801130*

---

Previous piece-meal discussions:

 - https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/18968#discussion_r2383536342
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4360#discussion_r2436801130
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4308#discussion_r2267952321

Reviewer 11: Related issue: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/2378

omitted from the `sticky.events` section. This ensures we minimise duplication in the `/sync` response JSON.
This proposal recommends always putting sticky events into the `sticky.events` section _except_ if
the sticky event is going to be returned in the `timeline.events` section of the current sync response.
In other words, filter out any event from `sticky.events` where the event ID appears in `timeline.events`. 

Sticky events follow the same 'stream-like' behaviour as the `timeline`. This means clients will receive a sticky
event S _once_, and subsequent requests with an advanced `since` token will not return the same sticky event S.

When sending sticky events down `/sync`, the `unsigned` section SHOULD have a `sticky_duration_ttl_ms` to indicate
how many milliseconds until the sticky event expires. This provides a way to reduce clock skew between a local homeserver
and their connected clients. Clients SHOULD use this value to determine when the sticky event expires.

Over Simplified Sliding Sync, Sticky Events have their own extension `sticky_events`, which has the following response shape:

```js
{
  "rooms": {

>       "!726s6s6q:example.com": {

Reviewer 11: Clarify which rooms show up here. All rooms or only rooms relevant to the `lists`/`room_subscriptions`

    Must be greater than zero. Servers may impose a smaller limit than requested.

Response body:
```js
{
  "sticky_events": [ ... ], // list of sticky events
  // If there are still more sticky events to fetch,
  // a new `from` token the client can use to walk further
  // backwards. (The `to` token, if used, should be reused.)
  "end": "OPAQUE_TOKEN"
}
```

NB: This endpoint may also be used to retrieve sticky events in a room without calling `/sync` at all (by omitting both `from` and `to`),
which may be useful for bots.

### Rate limits

As sticky events are sent to clients regardless of the timeline limit, care needs to be taken to ensure
that other room participants cannot send large volumes of sticky events.

Servers SHOULD rate limit sticky events over federation. Servers can choose one of two options to do this:
 - A) Do not persist the sticky events and expect the other server to retry later.
 - B) Persist the sticky events but wait a while before delivering them to clients.

Option A means servers don't need to store sticky events in their database, protecting disk usage at the cost of more bandwidth.

> To implement this, servers MUST return a non-2xx status code from `/send` such that the sending server

Reviewer 12: suspicious: rather than saying what code you *should* use, it says what code you *shouldn't*. If we want to suggest this approach I think we should provide stronger guidance.
But the `/send` endpoint already has per-event statuses, so this feels a bit off as an approach. Separately, a non-2xx response will likely just cause the sending server to retry and/or mark you as down.
For this reason it's hard to recommend this approach and I'm wondering if we should recommend against it, except as a fallback when you're desperate / dealing with a highly-likely malicious case?

* They are eagerly **pushed** to all other servers.[^partial]  
* They must be **delivered** to clients.[^sync]
* Only state event level **checks** are applied to them.[^softfail][^hisvis]

To implement these properties, servers MUST:

* Attempt to **push** their own[^origin] sticky events to all joined servers, whilst respecting per-server backoff times.
  Large volumes of events to send MUST NOT cause the sticky event to be dropped from the send queue on the server.
* When a new server joins the room, existing servers MUST attempt to **push** all of their own sticky events[^newjoiner].
* Ensure sticky events are **delivered** to clients via `/sync` in a new section of the sync response,
  regardless of whether the sticky event falls within the timeline limit of the request.
  If there are too many sticky events to deliver at once, they will be delivered in subsequent `/sync` responses instead.
* Soft-failure **checks** MUST be re-evaluated when the membership state changes for a user with unexpired sticky events.[^softfail]
* History visibility **checks** MUST NOT be applied to sticky events. Any joined user is authorised to see sticky events

>   for the duration they remain sticky.[^hisvis]

Reviewer 3: Moved to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4480/changes#r3274661843.

When an event loses its stickiness, these properties disappear with the stickiness. Servers SHOULD NOT
eagerly synchronise such events anymore, nor send them down `/sync`, nor re-evaluate their soft-failure status.
Note: policy servers and other similar antispam techniques still apply to these events.

These messages may be combined with [MSC4140: Delayed Events](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4140)
to provide heartbeat semantics (e.g required for MatrixRTC). Note that the sticky duration in this proposal
is distinct from that of delayed events. The purpose of the sticky duration in this proposal is to ensure sticky events are cleaned up,

> whereas the purpose of delayed events is to affect the send time (and thus start time for stickiness) of an event.

Reviewer 3: > In conversation with peers, people who have not read this MSC but only somehow heard about it are usually assuming some kind of self-destruction related to the timer.

I acknowledge that this is subjective but I haven't personally made that connection. I actually find "sticky" a fairly fitting term. I think of it as there being some glue on the event that makes it "stick to the top". The glue wears off after a while and the event "falls down", becoming a normal one. This image isn't perfect but, personally, I find it more suitable than "priority" or "important".

        "sticky": {
            "events": [
                {
                    "sender": "@bob:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920341020,
                    "content": { ... },
                    "unsigned": { "sticky_duration_ttl_ms": 258113 }
                },
                {
                    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
                    "type": "m.foo",
                    "sticky": {
                      "duration_ms": 300000
                    },
                    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
                    "content": { ... }
                    "unsigned": { "sticky_duration_ttl_ms": 289170 }
                }
            ]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
Sticky messages MAY be sent in the timeline section of the `/sync` response, regardless of whether
or not they exceed the timeline limit[^ordering]. If a sticky event is in the timeline, it MAY be
omitted from the `sticky.events` section. This ensures we minimise duplication in the `/sync` response JSON.

> This proposal recommends always putting sticky events into the `sticky.events` section _except_ if

Reviewer 12: I'd like to suggest we make this `MUST` rather than recommendation.
I don't see any benefit in allowing divergence and it could result in clients mishandling events on some server implementations.

Reviewer 3: > I'd like to suggest we make this `MUST` rather than recommendation. I don't see any benefit in allowing divergence and it could result in clients mishandling events on some server implementations.

I think this is reflected in the proposal now:

> If a sticky event appears in the timeline section of the `/sync` response (`timeline.events`),
it MUST NOT be included in the `sticky.events` section.

rate when implementing ephemeral maps (see "Addendum: Implementing an ephemeral map"), as that relies on servers referencing sticky
events from other servers.

## Potential issues

### Time

Servers who can’t maintain correct clock frequency may expire sticky events at a slightly slower/faster rate
than other servers. As the maximum timeout is relatively low, the total deviation is also reasonably low,
making this less problematic. The alternative of explicitly sending an expiration event would likely cause
more deviation due to retries than deviations due to clocks.

Servers with significant clock skew may set `origin_server_ts` too far in the past or future. If the value
is too far in the past this will cause sticky events to expire quicker than they should, or to always be
treated as expired. If the value is too far in the future, this has no effect as it is bounded by the current time.
As such, this proposal relies somewhat on NTP to ensure clocks over federation are roughly in sync.
As a consequence of this, the sticky duration SHOULD NOT be set to below 5 minutes.[^ttl] 

> ### Encryption

Reviewer 3: In the current addendum, the event type is part of the map key. So I think this might be resolved?

# MSC4354: Sticky Events

> MatrixRTC currently relies on allowing any user (PL0) to send `org.matrix.msc3401.call`
> and `org.matrix.msc3401.call.member` state events into the room

Reviewer 3: I think a link to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3401 could help to provide some context here.

```suggestion
MatrixRTC currently relies on allowing any user (PL0) to send the `org.matrix.msc3401.call`
and `org.matrix.msc3401.call.member` state events from
[MSC3401](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3401) into the room
```

for sending per-user per-device state. MatrixRTC wants to be able to share a temporary state to all
users in a room to indicate whether the given client is in the call or not. 

The concerns with allowing any user to send room state and using it for MatrixRTC are mainly:

> 1. Any user can modify other user's call state. MSC3757 tries to fix this, but in order to ensure other
>    users are unable to modify each other’s state, it proposes using string packing for authorization which
>    feels wrong, given the structured nature of events.  

Reviewer 3: Just linkifying MSC3757.

```suggestion
1. Any user can modify other user's call state. [MSC3757](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3757)
   tries to fix this, but in order to ensure other users are unable to modify each other’s state, it proposes
   using string packing for authorization which feels wrong, given the structured nature of events.  
```

**Interaction with `RoomFilter`:** The `RoomFilter` does not apply to the `sticky.events` section, as it is neither `timeline` nor `state`.
However, the `timeline` filter MUST be applied before applying the deduplication logic above.
In other words, if a sticky event would normally appear in both the `timeline.events` section and the `sticky.events` section,
but is filtered out by the `timeline` filter, the sticky event MUST appear in `sticky.events`.

Sticky events follow the same 'stream-like' behaviour as the `timeline`. This means clients will receive a sticky
event S _once_, and subsequent requests with an advanced `since` token will not return the same sticky event S.

When sending sticky events down `/sync`, the `unsigned` section SHOULD have a `sticky_duration_ttl_ms` to indicate
how many milliseconds until the sticky event expires. This provides a way to reduce clock skew between a local homeserver
and their connected clients. Clients SHOULD use this value to determine when the sticky event expires.

When the user joins a room, the server MUST include all unexpired sticky events for that room in their subsequent
sync response.

> #### MSC4186 (Simplified) Sliding Sync

Reviewer: Mentioned out of band: splitting sliding sync out of this proposal puts it on a significantly faster path towards acceptance. The extension can get its own MSC and be reviewed in that context. 

It's not *technically* required to split the extension out, but not doing so means this is blocked behind sliding sync, which is moving exceptionally slowly through the process.

Reviewer 3: I broke out the Sliding Sync extension into https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4480 but haven't yet carrier over the relevant review threads.

Reviewer 3: Unless I've missed something, there was only one unresolved comment left that was exclusive to the Sliding Sync extension. Have copied it over to #4480.

Reviewer 3: This should now be resolved.

in their subsequent sync responses.
The server MAY spread them across multiple sync responses or the server MAY ignore the `limit` specified
in the request extension for this case, depending on implementation preference.

#### Pagination

Because sticky events and to-device messages are alike in the way that they should be *reliably* delivered to
clients, without any gaps in the pagination, they follow the [MSC3885: Sliding Sync Extension: To-Device messages][MSC3885]
model for pagination in sliding sync.

In short: when there are too many sticky events to return in one response, the server returns a limited number
of the oldest sticky events that have not yet been delivered.

At every response, the server returns a `next_batch` token which the client MUST persist and send
as a `since` token in the next Sliding Sync request (in the extension), if the client wishes to advance
in the sticky events stream.

However, we don't require `next_batch` to be provided in the response when there are no changes, because that seems
like a mistake, which would lead to unnecessarily high quiescent bandwidth usage if many extensions follow this pattern.

> [There is a comment thread open on MSC3885.](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3885#discussion_r2623950713).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[There is a comment thread open on MSC3885](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3885#discussion_r2623950713).
```

Reviewer 3: This is obsolete due to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354/changes#r3274483502 now.

One concern is that [MSC3885] has not yet been updated to account for [MSC4186 'Simplified' Sliding Sync][MSC4186],
the 'modern-day' dialect of Sliding Sync, so it is unknown whether this pattern will remain in use.

> Whatever happens, this MSC should likely follow the same evolution as that one.

Reviewer 3: This section and the one above seem to be the only parts of this proposal that depend on Sliding Sync. Maybe these parts should be split off into a separate proposal to break the dependency of the remainder?

Reviewer 3: Resolving in favor of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4354/changes#r3269097438.

[MSC3885]: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3885
[MSC4186]: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4186

Another concern is a potential problem that we are calling 'flickering'.
This is where due to oldest-first pagination, a client might briefly display stale data before
near-immediately updating it with later data, despite that later data already having been 'available'
on the server.

With that said, given this is an edge case that requires a substantial number of sticky events to trigger,
we don't currently consider it worthwhile to add complexity to avoid.

> 

Reviewer 3: These two sections have been moved to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4480.

```suggestion
```

of the `prev_events` of all sticky events they send to other servers. This is important because the receiving server will
attempt to fetch those previous events if they are unaware of them, _rejecting the transaction_ if the sending server fails
to provide them. For this reason, it is not possible for servers to reliably deliver _other server's_ sticky events.

In the common case, sticky events are sent over federation like any other event and do not cause any behavioural changes.
The two cases where this is different is:
 - when sending sticky events to newly joined servers
 - when sending "old" but unexpired sticky events

Servers tend to maintain a sliding window of events to deliver to other servers e.g the most recent 50 PDUs. Sticky events
can fall outside this range, which is what we define as "old". On the receiving server, old events appear to have unknown
`prev_events`, which cannot be connected to any known part of the room DAG. Sending sticky events to newly joined servers can be seen
as a form of sending old but unexpired sticky events, and so this proposal only considers this case.

> Sending these old events will potentially increase the number of forward extremities in the room for the receiving server. This may impact state resolution
> performance if there are many forward extremities. Servers MAY send dummy events to remove forward extremities (Synapse has the
> option to do this since 2019). Alternatively, servers MAY choose not to add old sticky events to their forward extremities, but
> this A) reduces eventual delivery guarantees by reducing the frequency of transitive delivery of events, B) reduces the convergence
> rate when implementing ephemeral maps (see "Addendum: Implementing an ephemeral map"), as that relies on servers referencing sticky
> events from other servers.

Reviewer 3: Just linking to the docs of said Synapse option.

```suggestion
Sending these old events will potentially increase the number of forward extremities in the room for the receiving server. This may impact state resolution
performance if there are many forward extremities. Servers MAY send dummy events to remove forward extremities (Synapse has the
[option] to do this since 2019). Alternatively, servers MAY choose not to add old sticky events to their forward extremities, but
this A) reduces eventual delivery guarantees by reducing the frequency of transitive delivery of events, B) reduces the convergence
rate when implementing ephemeral maps (see "Addendum: Implementing an ephemeral map"), as that relies on servers referencing sticky
events from other servers.

[option]: https://element-hq.github.io/synapse/latest/usage/configuration/config_documentation.html?highlight=dummy#dummy_events_threshold
```

than other servers. As the maximum timeout is relatively low, the total deviation is also reasonably low,
making this less problematic. The alternative of explicitly sending an expiration event would likely cause
more deviation due to retries than deviations due to clocks.

Servers with significant clock skew may set `origin_server_ts` too far in the past or future. If the value
is too far in the past this will cause sticky events to expire quicker than they should, or to always be
treated as expired. If the value is too far in the future, this has no effect as it is bounded by the current time.
As such, this proposal relies somewhat on NTP to ensure clocks over federation are roughly in sync.
As a consequence of this, the sticky duration SHOULD NOT be set to below 5 minutes.[^ttl] 

### Encryption

Encrypted sticky events reduce reliability as in order for a sticky event to be visible to the end user it
requires *both* the sending client to think the receiver is joined (so we encrypt for their devices) and the
receiving server to think the sender is joined (so it passes auth checks). Unencrypted events only strictly
require the receiving server to think the sender is joined.

> The lack of historical room key sharing may make some encrypted sticky events undecryptable when new users join the room. 
> [MSC4268: Sharing room keys for past messages](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4268) would
> help with this.

Reviewer 3: This MSC has since been merged. So maybe we can reformulate this slightly?

```suggestion
The prior lack of historical room key sharing that could make some encrypted sticky events undecryptable when new users join the room
has been alleviated with [MSC4268: Sharing room keys for past messages](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4268).
```

automatically get reaped (even if the amount of bloat is limited), and b) what do clients do if there are already too many
sticky events? The latter is tricky, as deleting the oldest may not be what the user wants if it happens to be not-stale data,
and asking the user what data it wants to delete vs keep is unergonomic.

Non-expiring sticky events could be added later if the above issues are resolved.

### Have a dedicated ‘ephemeral user state’ section

Early prototypes of this proposal devised a key-value map with timeouts maintained over EDUs rather than PDUs.
This early proposal had a similar overall feature set as this proposal but with two differences:
 - The early proposal never persisted anything, whereas this one persists by default to the DAG (which could be deleted via message retention).
   Some use cases would like to have persistence.
 - The lack of any persistence enabled equivocation attacks.

Servers could broadcast different values for the same key to different servers, causing the map to not converge:
the Byzantine Broadcast problem. Matrix already has a data structure to agree on shared state: the room DAG.

> As such, this led to the prototype to the current proposal. By putting the data into the DAG, other servers

Reviewer 3: I think there is some duplication here?

```suggestion
As such, this led to the current proposal. By putting the data into the DAG, other servers
```

The `/versions` response in the CSAPI includes:
```json
{
    "versions": ["..."],
    "unstable_features": {
        "org.matrix.msc4354": true
    }
}
```

## Addendum

This section explains how sticky events can be used to implement a short-lived, per-user, per-room key-value store.
This technique would be used by MatrixRTC to synchronise RTC members, and should land in the spec as a suggested algorithm to follow.

### Implementing an ephemeral map

MatrixRTC relies on a per-user, per-device map of RTC member events. To implement this, this MSC proposes
a standardised mechanism for determining keys on sticky events, the `content.sticky_key` property:

```js
{
    "type": "m.rtc.member",
    "sticky": {
        "duration_ms": 300000
    },
    "sender": "@alice:example.com",
    "room_id": "!foo",
    "origin_server_ts": 1757920344000,
    "content": {
        "sticky_key": "LAPTOPXX123",
        ...
    }
}
```

`content.sticky_key` is ignored server-side[^encryption] and is purely informational. Clients which
receive a sticky event with a `sticky_key` SHOULD keep a map with keys determined via the 4-uple[^3uple]

> `(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` to track the current values in the map. Nothing stops
> users sending multiple events with the same `sticky_key`. To deterministically tie-break, clients which

Reviewer 3: I think in the 4-uple both need to be identical to require tie-breaking?

```suggestion
`(room_id, sender, type, content.sticky_key)` to track the current values in the map. Nothing stops
users sending multiple events with the same event type and `sticky_key`. To deterministically tie-break, clients which
```

>[!NOTE]
> If a client sends two sticky events in the same millisecond, the 2nd event may be replaced by the 1st if
> the event ID of the 1st event has a higher lexicographical event ID. To protect against this, clients should
> ensure that they wait at least 1 millisecond between sending sticky events with the same `sticky_key`.

Clients SHOULD expire sticky events in maps when their stickiness ends. They should use the algorithm described in this proposal
to determine if an event is still sticky. Clients may diverge if they do not expire sticky events as in the following scenario:
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    HS1->>+HS2: Sticky event S (1h sticky)
    HS2->>Client: Sticky event S (1h sticky)
    HS2->>-HS1: OK
    HS2->>+HS2: Goes offline
    HS1->>+HS2: Sticky event S' (1h sticky)
    HS1->>+HS2: Retry Sticky event S' (1h sticky)
    HS1->>+HS2: Retry Sticky event S' (1h sticky)
    HS1->>HS1: Sticky event S' expires
    HS2->>HS2: Back online
    Client->>Client: Sticky event S still valid!
```

There is no mechanism for sticky events to expire earlier than their timeout value. To remove entries in the map, clients SHOULD

> send another sticky event with just `content.sticky_key` set, with all the other application-specific fields omitted. Redacting
> sticky events are an alternative way to do this, although this loses the `content.sticky_key` property so clients will need to

Reviewer 3: I _think_ this should be "is" rather than "are"?

```suggestion
send another sticky event with just `content.sticky_key` set, with all the other application-specific fields omitted. Redacting
sticky events is an alternative way to do this, although this loses the `content.sticky_key` property so clients will need to
```

	"device_id": "AAvTvsyf5F",
	"sender_key": "KVMNIv/HyP0QMT11EQW0X8qB7U817CUbqrZZCsDgeFE",
	"session_id": "c4+O+eXPf0qze1bUlH4Etf6ifzpbG3YeDEreTVm+JZU"
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1757948616527,
  "sender": "@alice:example.com",
  "type": "m.room.encrypted",
  "sticky": {
      "duration_ms": 600000
  },
  "event_id": "$lsFIWE9JcIMWUrY3ZTOKAxT_lIddFWLdK6mqwLxBchk",
  "room_id": "!ffCSThQTiVQJiqvZjY:matrix.org"
}
```

The decrypted event would contain the `type` and `content.sticky_key`.

#### Spam

Under normal circumstances for the MatrixRTC use case there will be a window of time where clients will receive
sticky events that are not useful. MatrixRTC defines an `m.rtc.member` event with an empty content (and optional `leave_reason`)
as having [left the session](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/toger5/matrixRTC/proposals/4143-matrix-rtc.md#leaving-a-session).
This is conceptually the same as deleting a key from the map. However, as the server is unaware of the `sticky_key`, it
cannot perform the delete operation for clients, and will instead send the empty content event down `/sync`. This means if

> N users leave a call, there will be N sticky events present in `/sync` for the sticky duration specified.

Reviewer 3: They will only occur once in `/sync` though given what the proposals says further up?

> Sticky events follow the same 'stream-like' behaviour as the `timeline`. This means clients will receive a sticky
> event S _once_, and subsequent requests with an advanced `since` token will not return the same sticky event S.

Author: Correct.
